.TH MACSCP 1 "2026-03-19" "macscp" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
macscp \- WinSCP-style SFTP client for macOS
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B macscp
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B MacSCP
is a graphical dual-pane SFTP client for macOS, modelled on WinSCP.
It is written in Python with PyQt6 for the UI and paramiko for SSH/SFTP.
.PP
The left pane shows your local filesystem.
The right pane shows the remote filesystem after connecting.
Files can be transferred by selecting and using Upload/Download, or by drag and drop between panes.
Multiple remote hosts can be open simultaneously, each in its own tab.
.SH INSTALL
.B One-line install:
.PP
.RS
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/refap3/macscp/main/install.sh | bash
.RE
.PP
The installer clones the repo, creates a Python virtual environment, installs dependencies,
and adds the
.B macscp
command to
.IR ~/.local/bin/ .
.PP
.B Update:
.PP
.RS
bash ~/macscp/update.sh
.RE
.PP
.B Complete wipe (if install or update is broken):
.PP
.RS
rm -rf ~/macscp ~/.local/bin/macscp
.RE
Then re-run the one-line installer.
.PP
.B Manual run:
.PP
.RS
cd ~/macscp
.br
.venv/bin/python main.py
.RE
.SH CONNECTION
.TP
.B New connection
Press
.BR \(cmN
or use
.B File > New Connection.
Enter host, port (default 22), username, and either a password or a private key file.
Supported key types: RSA, Ed25519, ECDSA.
.TP
.B Saved sessions
Previously used hosts appear in the sessions dropdown for one-click reconnect.
Sessions are stored in
.I ~/.macscp/sessions.json
(no passwords stored).
.TP
.B Multiple sessions
Each connection opens in its own tab.
Open additional tabs with
.BR \(cmT .
.TP
.B Connection status
A colour-coded dot in the toolbar shows the connection state:
grey (disconnected), orange (connecting), green (connected), red (error).
.TP
.B Keepalive
A null packet is sent every 30 s to prevent idle sessions from dropping.
.SH FILE BROWSER
Both panels (local and remote) share the same controls.
.TP
.B Navigate
Double-click a folder to enter it.
Use
.B < Back,
.B ^ Up,
.B Home
buttons, or type a path in the address bar.
.TP
.B Hidden files
Toggle dotfiles on/off with the hidden-files button.
Hidden files are shown in grey when visible.
.TP
.B Filter
Type in the filter box to narrow the file list instantly (80 ms debounce).
.TP
.B Sort
Click any column header (Name, Size, Modified, Permissions) to sort.
Click again to reverse. A \(bu/\(bv indicator shows direction.
.TP
.B Bookmarks
Press the \(co button or right-click \(-> Add Bookmark to save the current path.
Jump to saved paths from the bookmark menu.
Bookmarks are stored in
.IR ~/.macscp/bookmarks.json .
.TP
.B Right-click menu
Open, Edit in VS Code, View contents, Delete, Rename, Properties,
Copy Path, New Folder, New File, Add Bookmark, Open Terminal.
.SH FILE TRANSFER
.TP
.B Upload
Select files in the Local pane and press
.BR \(cmU ,
or drag from Local to Remote.
.TP
.B Download
Select files in the Remote pane and press
.BR \(cmD ,
or drag from Remote to Local.
.TP
.B Directories
Uploads and downloads recurse into directories automatically.
.TP
.B Conflict resolution
When a file already exists at the destination, a dialog offers:
Overwrite, Skip, Overwrite All, Skip All, Cancel.
.TP
.B Progress
A progress dialog shows current file and overall progress.
.TP
.B Transfer log
Opens automatically at the bottom on first transfer.
Shows a timestamped result (OK / FAILED) for each file.
.SH REMOTE TOOLS
.TP
.B Edit in VS Code
Downloads the remote file to a temporary path, opens it in VS Code, and
auto-uploads it back every time you save. Requires
.I code
on PATH.
.TP
.B Execute command
Run a shell command on the remote host and view the output in a popup dialog.
.TP
.B SSH terminal
Opens a Terminal.app window with an SSH session to the remote host.
.SH KEYBOARD SHORTCUTS
.TS
l l.
\(cmN	New connection
\(cmT	New tab
\(cmW	Close tab
\(cmR	Refresh both panels
\(cmU	Upload selected
\(cmD	Download selected
\(cmA	Select all (active panel)
\(cmC	Copy path of selected items
F2	Rename selected item
F5	Refresh active panel
Delete	Delete selected items
\(cmQ	Quit
.TE
.SH PROJECT STRUCTURE
.TS
l l.
main.py	Entry point; sets up Qt application
requirements.txt	Python dependencies
install.sh	One-line installer
update.sh	Updater (git pull + pip install)
macscp	Shell launcher script
core/ssh_client.py	SSH/SFTP wrapper (paramiko)
core/session_manager.py	Saved-session persistence
gui/_invoke.py	Thread-safe main-thread callback helper
gui/app.py	Main window, toolbar, session tabs, transfer log
gui/connection_dialog.py	New-connection modal
gui/file_panel.py	Dual-purpose file browser panel
gui/transfer_dialog.py	Transfer progress dialog
gui/overwrite_dialog.py	Overwrite/Skip conflict resolution dialog
gui/properties_dialog.py	File properties popup
.TE
.SH DATA FILES
.TP
.I ~/.macscp/sessions.json
Saved SSH hosts. Passwords are never stored here.
.TP
.I ~/.macscp/bookmarks.json
Bookmarked directory paths for local and remote panels.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
.TP
macOS 12+
Uses
.I osascript
for Terminal.app integration.
.TP
Python 3.10+
.TP
PyQt6 >= 6.5
.TP
paramiko >= 3.0
SSH/SFTP library.
.TP
code (VS Code CLI)
Only required for "Edit in VS Code". Must be on PATH.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sftp (1),
.BR ssh (1),
.BR python3 (1)
.SH VIEW THIS PAGE
.RS
man macscp
.RE
.SH AUTHOR
rainers
